Add LlamaIndex Workflow blog (#116)
mlflow/mlflow-website: website/blog/2024-10-25-llama-index-workflow/index.md

---
title: Building Advanced RAG with MLflow and LlamaIndex Workflow
description: A guide for using LlamaIndex Workflow with MLflow for building advanced QA application.
slug: mlflow-llama-index-workflow
authors: [yuki-watanabe]
tags: [genai, mlops, mlflow-evaluate]
---

> Augmenting LLMs with various data sources is a strong strategy to build LLM applications. However, as the system grows more complex, it is challenging to xxx and running quick development cycle for improvement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Augmenting LLMs with various data sources is a strong strategy to build LLM applications. However, as the system grows more complex, it becomes challenging to prototype and iteratively build  improvements to these more complex systems.
```

> LlamaIndex Workflow is a great framework to build such compound system, and combined with MLflow brings efficiency and robustness in the development cycle, featuring debugging, tracking experiment, and evaluation for continuous improvement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LlamaIndex Workflow is a great framework to build such compound systems. Combined with MLflow, the Workflow API brings efficiency and robustness in the development cycle, enabling easy debugging, experiment tracking, and evaluation for continuous improvement.
```

> In this blog, we will go through the journey of building an sophisticated chatbot with LlamaIndex Workflow and MLflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this blog, we will go through the journey of building a sophisticated chatbot with LlamaIndex Workflow and MLflow.
```

## What is LlamaIndex Workflow?

[LlamaIndex Workflow](https://docs.llamaindex.ai/en/stable/module_guides/workflow/) is an event-driven orchestration framework for designing dynamic AI applications. The core of LlamaIndex Workflow consists of:

* `Steps` are units of execution, representing distinct actions in the workflow.

* `Events` trigger these steps, acting as signals that control the workflow’s flow.

* `Workflow` connects these two as a Python class. Each step is implemented as a method of the workflow class, defined with input and output events.

> This simple yet powerful abstraction allows you to break down complex tasks into manageable steps, enabling greater flexibility and scalability. As a nature of event-driven design, it is super easy to design parallel/asynchronous execution flow, which significantly enhances efficiency involve long-running tasks and provides production-ready scalability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This simple yet powerful abstraction allows you to break down complex tasks into manageable steps, enabling greater flexibility and scalability. As a framework embodying event-driven design, using the `Workflow` APIs makes it intuitive to design parallel and asynchronous execution flows, significantly enhancing the efficiency of  long-running tasks and aids in providing production-ready scalability.
```

## Why Use MLflow with LlamaIndex Workflow?

> Workflow provides great flexibility to design nearly arbitral execution flow. However, the great power comes with great responsibility. Without managing your change properly, it can become a chaos of states and configurations. A few weeks of later, "why did my workflow work?".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Workflow provides great flexibility to design nearly arbitrary execution flows. However, with this great power comes a great responsibility. Without managing your change properly, it can become a chaotic mess of indeterminate states and confusing configurations. After a few dozen changes, you may be asking yourself, "how did my workflow even work?".
```

> **MLflow** brings powerful MLOps harness to LlamaIndex Workflow throughout the end-to-end development cycle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**MLflow** brings a powerful MLOps harness to LlamaIndex Workflows throughout the end-to-end development cycle.
```

- **Experiment Tracking**: MLflow allows you to record various components like steps, prompts, LLMs, and tools, making it easy to improve the system iteratively.

- **Reproducibility**: MLflow packages environment information such as global configurations (`Settings`), library versions, and metadata to ensure consistent deployment across different stages of the ML lifecycle.

> - **Tracing**: Debugging issues in a complex event-driven workflow is cumbersome. MLflow Tracing is a production-ready observability solution that natively integrated with LlamaIndex.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Tracing**: Debugging issues in a complex event-driven workflow is cumbersome. MLflow Tracing is a production-ready observability solution that natively integrates with LlamaIndex, giving you observability into each internal stage within your Workflow.
```

> - **Evaluation**: Measuring is a crucial task for improving your model. MLflow Evaluation is great tool to evaluate the quality, speed, and cost of your LLM application. It is tightly integrated with experiment tracking capability, streamlining the iterative improvement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Evaluation**: Measuring is a crucial task for improving your model. MLflow Evaluation is great tool to evaluate the quality, speed, and cost of your LLM application. It is tightly integrated with MLflow's experiment tracking capabilities, streamlining the process of making iterative improvements.
```

## Let's Build!🛠️

### Strategy: Hybrid Approach Using Vector Search and Web Search

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) is a powerful framework, but the retrieval step can often become a bottleneck, because embedding-based retrieval may not always capture the most relevant context. While many techniques exist to improve retrieval quality, no single solution works universally. Therefore, an effective strategy is to combine multiple retrieval approaches.

The concept we will explore here is to run several retrieval methods in parallel: (1) standard vector search, (2) keyword-based search (BM25), and (3) web search. The retrieved contexts are then merged, with irrelevant data filtered out to enhance the overall quality.

![Hybrid RAG Concept](llama_index_workflow_hybrid_rag_concept.png)

How do we bring this concept to life? Let’s dive in and build this hybrid RAG using LlamaIndex Workflow and MLflow.

## 1. Set Up Repository

> The sample code, including the environment setup script, is available in the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/B-Step62/mlflow-llama-index-workflow-example). It contains a complete workflow definition, a hands-on notebook, and a sample dataset for running experiments. To clone it to your working environment, use the following command:

Reviewer: Let's update the link :)

```shell

> git clone https://github.com/B-Step62/mlflow-llama-index-workflow-example.git

Reviewer: And update this link

## 5. Define a Workflow

Now that the environment and data sources are ready, we can build the workflow and experiment with it. The complete workflow code is defined in the `workflow` directory. Let's explore some key components of the implementation.

### Events

The `workflow/events.py` file defines all the events used within the workflow. These are simple Pydantic models that carry information between workflow steps. For example, the `VectorSearchRetrieveEvent` triggers the vector search step by passing the user's query.

```python
class VectorSearchRetrieveEvent(Event):
    """Event for triggering VectorStore index retrieval step."""
    query: str
```

### Prompts

Throughout the workflow execution, we call LLMs multiple times. The prompt templates for these LLM calls are defined in the `workflow/prompts.py` file.

### Workflow Class

The main workflow class is defined in `workflow/workflow.py`. Let's break down how it works.

The constructor accepts a retrievers argument, which specifies the retrieval methods to be used in the workflow. For instance, if `["vector_search", "bm25"]` is passed, the workflow performs vector search and keyword-based search, skipping web search.

> 💡 Deciding retrievers dynamically allows us to experiment different retrieval strategies without replicating model code with almost same definition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
💡 Deciding which retrievers to utilize dynamically allows us to experiment with different retrieval strategies without needing to replicate nearly identical model code.
```

```python
    reranker = RankGPTRerank(llm=self.llm, top_n=5)
    reranked_nodes = reranker.postprocess_nodes(ev.nodes, query_str=query)
    reranked_context = "\n".join(node.text for node in reranked_nodes)
```

Finally, the reranked context is passed to the LLM along with the user query to generate the final answer. The result is returned as a `StopEvent` with the `result` key.

```python
    @step
    async def query_result(self, ctx: Context, ev: QueryEvent) -> StopEvent:
        """Get result with relevant text."""
        query = await ctx.get("query")

        prompt = FINAL_QUERY_TEMPLATE.format(context=ev.context, query=query)
        response = self.llm.complete(prompt).text
        return StopEvent(result=response)
```

Now, let's instantiate the workflow and run it.

```python
# Workflow with VS + BM25 retrieval
from workflow.workflow import HybridRAGWorkflow

workflow = HybridRAGWorkflow(retrievers=["vector_search", "bm25"], timeout=60)
response = await workflow.run(query="Why use MLflow with LlamaIndex?")
print(response)
```

> ## 6. Log the Workflow in MLflow Experiment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 6. Log the Workflow in an MLflow Experiment
```

> Now we want to run the workflow with various different retrieval strategy and evaluate the performance. However, before running the evaluation, we'll log the model in MLflow to track both the model and its performance within an **MLflow Experiment**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we want to run the workflow with various different retrieval strategies and evaluate the performance of each. However, before running the evaluation, we'll log the model in MLflow to track both the model and its performance within an **MLflow Experiment**.
```

For the LlamaIndex Workflow, we use the new [Model-from-code](https://mlflow.org/docs/latest/models.html#models-from-code) method, which logs models as standalone Python scripts. This approach avoids the risks and instability associated with serialization methods like pickle, relying instead on code as the single source of truth for the model definition. When combined with MLflow's environment-freezing capability, it provides a reliable way to persist models. For more details, refer to the [MLflow documentation](https://mlflow.org/docs/latest/models.html#models-from-code).

💡 In the `workflow` directory, there's a `model.py` script that imports the `HybridRAGWorkflow` and instantiates it with dynamic configurations passed via the `model_config` parameter during logging. This design allows you to track models with different configurations without duplicating the model definition.

We'll start an MLflow Run and log the model script `model.py` with different configurations using the [mlflow.llama_index.log_model()](https://mlflow.org/docs/latest/python_api/mlflow.llama_index.html#mlflow.llama_index.log_model) API.

```python
# Different configurations we will evaluate.

> run_name_to_retrievers = {

Reviewer: How much overkill is it to do all valid combinations?

```
run_name_to_retrievers = {
    # 1. No retrievers (prior knowledge in LLM).
    "none": [],
    # 2. Vector search retrieval.
    "vs": ['vector_search'],
    # 3. Keyword search (BM25).
    "bm25": ['bm25'],
    # 4. Web search.
    "web": ['web_search'],
    # 5. Vector search retrieval and Keyword search (BM25).
    "vs + bm25": ['vector_search', 'bm25'],
    # 6. Vector search retrieval and Web search.
    "vs + web": ['vector_search', 'web_search'],
    # 7. Keyword search (BM25) and Web search.
    "bm25 + web": ['bm25', 'web_search'],
    # 8. Vector search retrieval and Keyword search (BM25) and Web search.
    "vs + bm25 + web": ['vector_search', 'bm25', 'web_search'],
}
```

Author: Good point, I initially did it but each combination costed some $$ and minutes so I shrank it😅 
Let me add a comment that we only have 4 here for demonstration purpose but users are not limited to run more.

Reviewer: Comment sounds perfect :D

```python
from mlflow.metrics import latency
from mlflow.metrics.genai import answer_correctness, faithfulness

for model_info in models:

    with mlflow.start_run(run_id=model_info.run_id):
        result = mlflow.evaluate(
            # Pass the URI of the logged model above
            model=model_info.model_uri,
            data=eval_df,
            # Specify the column for ground truth answers.
            targets="ground_truth",
            # Define the metrics to compute.
            extra_metrics=[
                latency(),
                answer_correctness("openai:/gpt-4o-mini"),
            ],
            # The answer_correctness metric requires "inputs" column to be
            # present in the dataset. We have "query" instead so need to
            # specify the mapping in `evaluator_config` parameter.
            evaluator_config={"col_mapping": {"inputs": "query"}},
        )
```

In this example, we evaluate the model with two metrics:

1. **Latency**: Measures the time taken to execute a workflow for a single query.
2. **Answer Correctness**: Evaluates the accuracy of answers based on the ground truth, scored by the OpenAI GPT-4o model on a 1–5 scale.

> These metrics are just for demonstration purposes—you can add additional metrics like toxicity or faithfulness, or even create your own.

Reviewer: Can we link to the metric creation guide? :)

Author: SG!

The evaluation process will take a few minutes. Once completed, you can view the results in the MLflow UI. Open the Experiment page and click on the chart icon 📈 above the Run list.

![Evaluation Result](llama_index_workflow_result_chart.png)

The first row shows bar charts for the answer correctness metrics, while the second row displays latency results. The best-performing combination is "Vector Search + BM25". Interestingly, adding web search not only increases latency significantly but also decreases answer correctness.

> Why does this happen? It appears some answers from the web-search-enabled model are off-topic. For example, in response to a question about starting Model Registry, the web-search model provides an unrelated answer about model deployment, while the "vs + bm25" model offers a correct response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Why does this happen? It appears some answers from the web-search-enabled model are off-topic. For example, in response to a question about starting the Model Registry, the web-search model provides an unrelated answer about model deployment, while the "vs + bm25" model offers a correct response.
```

To inspect the trace for a specific question from the evaluation, navigate to the "Traces" tab on the experiment page. Look for the row with the particular question in the request column and the run name "vs + bm25 + web." Clicking the request ID link opens the Trace UI, where you can view detailed information about each step in the execution, including inputs, outputs, metadata, and latency.

![Trace](llama_index_workflow_trace.png)

In this case, we identified the issue by examining the reranker step. The web search retriever returned irrelevant context related to model serving, and the reranker incorrectly ranked it as the most relevant. With this insight, we can determine potential improvements, such as refining the reranker to better understand MLflow topics, improving web search precision, or even removing the web search retriever altogether.

## Conclusion

> In this blog, we explored how the combination of LlamaIndex and MLflow can elevate the development of Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) workflows, bringing together powerful model management and observability capabilities. By integrating multiple retrieval strategies—such as vector search, BM25, and web search—we demonstrated how flexible retrieval can enhance the performance of LLM-driven applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this blog, we explored how the combination of LlamaIndex and MLflow can elevate the development of Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) workflows, bringing together powerful model management and observability capabilities. By integrating multiple retrieval strategies (such as vector search, BM25, and web search) we demonstrated how flexible retrieval can enhance the performance of LLM-driven applications.
```
